---------------------------------------------------------------
Excerpt from Part I Chapter 7 of the book 1984 by George Orwell
---------------------------------------------------------------

But
he knew the rest of the catalogue. There would be mention of the bishops in
their lawn sleeves, the judges in their ermine robes, the pillory, the stocks,
the treadmill, the cat-o'-nine tails, the Lord Mayor's Banquet, and the
practice of kissing the Pope's toe. There was also something called the jus
primae noctis, which would probably not be mentioned in a textbook for children.
It was the law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman
working in one of his factories.

How could you tell how much of it was lies?
It might be true that the average human being was better off now than he had
been before the Revolution. The only evidence to the contrary was the mute
protest in your own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived
in were intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different.
It struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not its
cruelty and insecurity, but simply its bareness, its dinginess, its
listlessness. Life, if you looked about you, bore no resemblance not only to the
lies that streamed out of the telescreens, but even to the ideals that the Party
was trying to achieve. Great areas of it, even for a Party member, were neutral
and non-political, a matter of slogging through dreary jobs, fighting for a
place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging a saccharine tablet, saving
a cigarette end. The ideal set up by the Party was something huge, terrible, and
glittering -- a world of steel and concrete, of monstrous machines and
terrifying weapons -- a nation of warriors and fanatics, marching forward in
perfect unity, all thinking the same thoughts and shouting the same slogans,
perpetually working, fighting, triumphing, persecuting -- three hundred million
people all with the same face. The reality was decaying, dingy cities where
underfed people shuffled to and fro in leaky shoes, in patched-up
nineteenth-century houses that smelt always of cabbage and bad lavatories. He
seemed to see a vision of London, vast and ruinous, city of a million dustbins,
and mixed up with it was a picture of Mrs Parsons, a woman with lined face and
wispy hair, fiddling helplessly with a blocked waste-pipe.

He reached down
and scratched his ankle again. Day and night the telescreens bruised your ears
with statistics proving that people today had more food, more clothes, better
houses, better recreations -- that they lived longer, worked shorter hours, were
bigger, healthier, stronger, happier, more intelligent, better educated, than
the people of fifty years ago. Not a word of it could ever be proved or
disproved. The Party claimed, for example, that today 40 per cent of adult
proles were literate: before the Revolution, it was said, the number had only
been 15 per cent. The Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only
160 per thousand, whereas before the Revolution it had been 300 -- and so it
went on. It was like a single equation with two unknowns. It might very well be
that literally every word in the history books, even the things that one
accepted without question, was pure fantasy. For all he knew there might never
have been any such law as the jus primae noctis, or any such creature as a
capitalist, or any such garment as a top hat.

Everything faded into mist. The
past was erased, the erasure was forgotten, the lie became truth. Just once in
his life he had possessed -- after the event: that was what counted -- concrete,
unmistakable evidence of an act of falsification. He had held it between his
fingers for as long as thirty seconds. In 1973, it must have been -- at any
rate, it was at about the time when he and Katharine had parted. But the really
relevant date was seven or eight years earlier.

The story really began in the
middle sixties, the period of the great purges in which the original leaders of
the Revolution were wiped out once and for all. By 1970 none of them was left,
except Big Brother himself. All the rest had by that time been exposed as
traitors and counter-revolutionaries. Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one
knew where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority
had been executed after spectacular public trials at which they made confession
of their crimes. Among the last survivors were three men named Jones, Aaronson,
and Rutherford. It must have been in 1965 that these three had been arrested. As
often happened, they had vanished for a year or more, so that one did not know
whether they were alive or dead, and then had suddenly been brought forth to
incriminate themselves in the usual way. They had confessed to intelligence with
the enemy (at that date, too, the enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public
funds, the murder of various trusted Party members, intrigues against the
leadership of Big Brother which had started long before the Revolution happened,
and acts of sabotage causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. After
confessing to these things they had been pardoned, reinstated in the Party, and
given posts which were in fact sinecures but which sounded important. All three
had written long, abject articles in The Times, analysing the reasons for their
defection and promising to make amends. 